# Fitting the simple and extended pulse models 
The descriptions of the models can be found here (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.04.438357v1). In brief, one approach to learn about admixture dates from genetic data uses a recombination clock model: Conceptually, admixture segments are the result of the introduced chromosomes being broken down by recombination; the offspring of an archaic and a modern human parent will have one whole chromosome each of either ancestry. Thus, the offsprings' markers are in full ancestry linkage disequilibrium (ALD); all archaic variants are present on one DNA molecule, and all modern human one on the other one. In each generation meiotic recombination will reshuffle the chromosomes, progressively breaking down the ancestral chromosome down into shorter segments of archaic ancestry and the Admixture induced Linkage Disequilibrium (ALD) similarly decreases with each generation after gene flow. One can fit the decline of segment length or ALD to resolve for the time since the admixture event. The simple pulse model assumes that all admixture happens in one generation and uses an exponential distribution to fit the segment length (using the exponential PDF) or ALD (using the tail function of the exponential) to resolve for the mean time of gene flow (tm). 

The extended pulse relaxes the one generation assumption by modeling the admixture process over a certain duration (td) as a discretized gamma distribution with shape = k+1 and scale = tm/k, rescaled by the admixture proportion alpha.
Where, td= 4 tm k^(-1/2). 

This results in a heavier tailed length distribution of segments/ALD (Lomax pdf/Lomax tail function). 

The admixture estimates both for ALD or directly inferred segments rely on precise genetic distances. We do not recommend to use a constant recombination rate to convert physical distances into genetic distances, rather population specific recombination maps.

## Fitting using ALD

To fit the simple and extended pulse on ALD we use the raw output from the ALDER program (Loh et al. 2013) can be used. The data has 3 columns: col 1 = distance between bins of SNPs the LD is computed for in centiMorgan, col 2 = the LD per bin, col 3 (optional) = bin count.
The script [Fitting_simple_and_extended_pulse_to_ALD.R](Extended_Admixture_Pulse_inferrence/Fitting_simple_and_extended_pulse_to_ALD.R) is based on Moorjani et al. 2016. It uses an residual sum of squares optimization function (DEoptim) to get good starting parameters for the nls function. Three parameters must be provided lval = lower value of distance between SNPs, hval = maximum value of distance and 
affine = (logical) if a parameter modeling background LD should be used. The lower and upper boundaries for the optimization are currently hard coded and are reasonable boundaries for Neandertal introgression, but one might want to change them for other scenarios.

## Fitting using segment length

To fit the simple and extended pulse using segment data one can inferre segments using many approaches. In our paper we used the method of Skov et al 2018. We only consider high probability segments with a posterior probability of 0.9 or higher and not shorter or longer than 0.05.1.2 cM. Be sure to only consider unique segments. If a segments is inferred to have the same physical starting and ending position (on the same chromosome) across individuals only count it once. Otherwise the independence assumption of observed segment length is violated. 
The script [Fitting_simple_and_extended_pulse_to_segment_length.R](Extended_Admixture_Pulse_inferrence/Fitting_simple_and_extended_pulse_to_segment_length.R) to fit the simple/extended pulses to directly inferred segments. We uses the R optim function (method="L-BFGS-B") to fit the data to an exponential or lomax pdf. The input data must at least contain one column (length_cM) giving the length of unique segments in centiMorgan. There are two additional parameters lower and upper cutoffs which indicates the bounds in which segments can be relaiably be called (we recomend 0.05/1.2 cM for data from present-day individuals). If you use cutoff, a truncated version of the pdf's will be fitted.

